>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JANUARY 17:
PRESIDENT OBAMA DEFENDS THE IRAN
DEAL, AS AMERICAN PRISONERS HELD
IN IRAN COME HOME AND MOST U.S.
SANCTIONS ARE LIFTED.
2.5 MILLION SYRIAN REFUGEES IN
TURKEY LIVING OUTSIDE REFUGEE
CAMPS, STRUGGLING TO BEGIN
AGAIN, AND WONDERING WHERE TO
GO NEXT.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND".
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS CALLING THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NUCLEAR
DISARMAMENT PACT WITH IRAN A
"MILESTONE" ACHIEVED BY BEING
UNAFRAID TO NEGOTIATE WITH
ADVERSARIES.
IN REMARKS AT THE WHITE HOUSE
TODAY, THE PRESIDENT SAID THE
DEAL CUTS OFF EVERY SINGLE PATH
IRAN HAD TO BUILD AN ATOMIC
WEAPON.
>> UNDER THE NUCLEAR DEAL THAT
WE, OUR PARTNERS, AND ALLIES
REACHED WITH IRAN LAST YEAR,
IRAN WILL NOT GET ITS HANDS ON A
NUCLEAR BOMB.
THE REGION, THE UNITED STATES,
AND THE WORLD WILL BE MORE
SECURE.
INSPECTORS WILL MONITOR IRAN'S
KEY NUCLEAR FACILITIES 24 HOURS
A DAY, 365 DAYS A YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY, IRANIAN
PRESIDENT HASSAN ROUHANI PRAISED
THE DEAL AS A VICTORY FOR THE
IRANIAN PEOPLE AND A MODEL FOR
RESOLVING FUTURE ISSUES.
>> (translated): THE PEOPLE OF
IRAN PROVED THAT CONSTRUCTIVE
INTERACTION IS TRUE AND IS THE
RIGHT WAY.
WE CAN HAVE INTERACTIONS WITH
THE WORLD THAT IS IN THE
INTEREST OF OUR PEOPLE AND
DEFINITELY NOT AT THE DETRIMENT
OF OTHERS.
>> Sreenivasan: A SWISS PLANE
CARRIED THREE OF THE FIVE
AMERICAN PRISONERS FREED BY IRAN
OUT OF THE COUNTRY TODAY.
WASHINGTON POST REPORTER JASON
REZAIAN, JAILED IN TEHRAN FOR A-
YEAR-AND-HALF, WAS AMONG THE MEN
WITH DUAL U.S.-IRANIAN
CITIZENSHIP LET GO IN A PRISONER
SWAP.
REZAIAN'S BROTHER, ALI, SAYS HIS
FAMILY'S NIGHTMARE IS ENDING.
>> JASON IS A LOVING BROTHER,
SON AND DEVOTED HUSBAND, WHOSE
LIFE WAS UNFAIRLY INTERRUPTED
WHEN HE WAS ARRESTED FOR CRIMES
HE DID NOT COMMIT.
JASON'S RELEASE HAS BROUGHT
INDESCRIBABLE RELIEF AND JOY TO
OUR FAMILY.
REACTION FOR AND AGAINST THE
HISTORIC DEAL POURED IN TODAY
FROM PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES
HERE AT HOME AND FROM LEADERS
AROUND THE WORLD.
>> I COMMEND THE MOVES BY THE
GOVERNMENTS OF BOTH COUNTRIES TO
IMPROVE TIES.
I'M ALSO HEARTENED BY THE
LIFTING OF SANCTIONS AGAINST
IRAN.
>> AS PRESIDENT, I WILL ENFORCE
IT, AND THERE HAVE TO BE
CONSEQUENCES IF IRAN VEERS AWAY
FROM WHAT IT HAS AGREED TO OR
WHAT IT HAS BEEN MANDATED TO DO
OR PROHIBITED FROM DOING BY THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY.
>> WHEN I AM PRESIDENT, WE WILL
END THE DEAL WITH IRAN.
IT WILL END WHEN I AM PRESIDENT.
WE'RE GONNA RE-IMPOSE SANCTIONS,
AND IF IRAN TRIES TO BUILD A
NUCLEAR WEAPON PROGRAM, WE WILL
STOP IT.
>> IF I WERE PRESIDENT TODAY, I
WOULD BE MEETING WITH EVERY ONE
OF OUR ALLIES AROUND THE WORLD
AND SAYING, "WE'RE GOING TO
MONITOR THIS DEAL AND IF THEY
VIOLATE ONE CROSSED-T OR ONE
DOTTED-I, WE NEED TO SLAP THE
SANCTIONS BACK ON.
>> I THINK THE AGREEMENT TO MAKE
CERTAIN THAT IRAN DOES NOT GET A
NUCLEAR WEAPON WAS A HUGE STEP
FORWARD.
THE FACT THAT WE HAD THIS
PRISONER RELEASE TODAY WAS A
GOOD, IMPORTANT STEP FORWARD.
>> (translated): IT IS CLEAR
THAT FROM NOW ON IRAN WILL HAVE
MORE MEANS TO USE FOR ITS TERROR
AND AGGRESSION ACTIVITY IN THE
REGION AND IN THE WORLD.
AND ISRAEL IS READY TO COPE WITH
ANY THREAT.
>> Sreenivasan: WHILE MANY U.S.
SANCTIONS IMPOSED ON IRAN HAVE
BEEN LIFTED, OTHERS REMAIN IN
EFFECT.
JUST TODAY, THE TREASURY
DEPARTMENT ANNOUNCED NEW
SANCTIONS ON ELEVEN FOREIGN
COMPANIES OR INDIVIDUALS FOR
SUPPLYING PARTS FOR IRAN'S
BALLISTIC MISSILE PROGRAM.
JOINING ME FROM WASHINGTON TO
DISCUSS THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF
THE IRAN DEAL IS BLOOMBERG NEWS
WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT ANGELA
GREILING KEANE.
YESTERDAY WE SAW SECRETARY OF
STATE KERRY SAYING AND THE EU
SAYING SANCTIONS HAVE BEEN
LIFTED.
TODAY WE'RE TALKING ABOUT NEW
SANCTIONS STILL IMPOSED ON THEM.
>> WELL, BOTH HAD THE BENEFIT OF
BEING TRUE.
WHAT HAPPENED YESTERDAY WAS WHEN
THE NEW CLEAR DEAL REACHED ITS
IMPLEMENTATION DAY, THE U.S. AND
THE OTHER PARTIES TO THAT
AGREEMENT LIFTED THE SANCTIONS
THEY HAD IMPOSED BECAUSE OF THE
IRANIAN NEW CLEAR PROGRAM.
SO THOSE EFFECTIVE YESTERDAY ARE
OFF.
HOWEVER TODAY, NOT UNRELATED TO
THE TIMING OF YESTERDAY, THE
U.S. TREASURY IMPOSED NEW
SANCTIONS ON 11 IRANIAN
BUSINESSES AND PEOPLE, PEOPLE
THAT DO BUSINESS WITH IRAN, AND
THE REASON FOR THOSE NEW
SANCTIONS IS BECAUSE OF IRAN'S
BALLISTIC MISSILE PROGRAM.
SINCE 2010 THE U.N. SECURITY
COUNCIL HAS REQUIRED THAT IRAN
NOT DEVELOP OR TEST BALLISTIC
MISSILES THAT COULD BE USED TO
LAUNCH NEW CLEAR WEAPONS, BUT OF
COURSE, THOSE TESTS HAVE
CONTINUED AS RECENTLY AS LAST
MONTH.
>> Sreenivasan: SO TO CLARIFY,
FOR BUSINESSES IN THE UNITED
STATES, WHAT HAPPENS?
THIS ISN'T LIKE OPENING OR
NORMALIZING OF RELATIONS WITH
CUBA.
>> RIGHT, PRESIDENT OBAMA USED
THE ANALOGY WHEN HE SPOKE TODAY
IN THE CABINET ROOM OF THE WHITE
HOUSE, IN IS VERY DIFFERENT THAN
CUBA BECAUSE WHILE THE U.S. DOES
NOW HAVE OFFICIAL DIPLOMATIC
RELATIONS WITH CUBA, IT DOES NOT
FOR IRAN.
FOR U.S. BUSINESSES THERE IS
STILL A LOT OF CAUTION AND
LIMITATIONS.
REALLY THE ONE SECTOR THAT
BENEFITS MOST FOR THE U.S. IS
AVIATION BECAUSE THE NEW CLEAR
DEAL THAT WAS REACHED LAST
SUMMER INCLUDED A CARVE OUT FOR
AIRPLANE PRODUCTION AND AIRPLANE
LEASING AND PARTS TO SERVICE
THAT INDUSTRY.
BUT OTHER INDUSTRIES,
PARTICULARLY FINANCIAL SERVICES
ARE STILL EXTREMELY LIMITED AND
HAVE REASON TO BE VERY, VERY
CAUTIOUS WHEN THEY PROCEED WITH
IRAN BECAUSE OF THE SANCTIONS
SUCH AS WE SAW FROM THIS
MORNING, THAT ARE STILL IN
PLACE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
OPTICS OF IT?
FOR EXAMPLE IRAN SAYS THEY ARE
GOING TO BUY A BUNCH OF PLANES,
BUT FROM AIRBUS, IS BOEING AT A
DISADVANTAGE THAT THEY COULDN'T
SELL NEARLY AS FAST BUT AT THE
SAME TIME WE HAVE A PRESIDENTIAL
RACE THAT IS HAPPENING.
>> EXACTLY.
THERE IS A LOT OF QUESTION
MARKS.
AIRBUS DID ANNOUNCE-- ANNOUNCE
THEIR DEAL WITH TEHRAN YESTERDAY
AND BOEING STILL HAS TO GO
THROUGH SOME HOOPS TO BE ABLE TO
LICENSE TO SELL TO IRAN.
THERE ARE STILL PLENTY OF
OPPORTUNITIES FOR BOWING.
IRAN HAS GREAT PLANE DEMAND.
THE AVERAGE AGE OF THEIR PLANES
IS 27 YEARS OLD FOR IRAN AIR.
SO THERE IS MORE OPPORTUNITY FOR
AVIATION.
BUT THERE ARE RISKS IN PART
BECAUSE OF OBJECTS.
IRAN IS INDEED NOT A FRIEND OF
THE U.S. AND THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION MADE CLEAR THERE
ARE SERIOUS CONCERNS ABOUT HUMAN
RIGHTS, RELATIONS WITH ISRAEL
AND OTHER ALLIES OF THE U.S. IN
THE MIDDLE EAST.
AND COMPANIES THAT WANT TO DO
BUSINESS WITH IRAN DO HAVE THAT
CONCERN.
HOW GOOD DOES IT LOOK TO BE
COZYING UP WITH IRAN AND THEN
THERE IS A QUESTION MARK OF WHAT
HAPPENS IF A REPUBLICAN IS
ELECTED TO SUCCEED OBAMA, WILL
THE DEAL STILL BE IN PLACE?
WILL THE AGREEMENT STAND.
HILLARY CLINTON THE LEADING
DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATE, OF COURSE,
WAS PRESIDENT OBAMA'S SECRETARY
OF STATE.
SO IF SHE IS TO WIN THE
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION, THERE IS
LITTLE DOUBT THAT THE AGREEMENT
WOULD STAY IN PLACE BECAUSE SHE
HELPED NEGOTIATE THE EARLY
STAGES OF IT.
>> Sreenivasan: IRAN ALSO SAYS
THAT THEY WERE GOING TO START
PRODUCTION AND I GUESS, SELLING
500,000 BARRELS OF OIL.
RIGHT NOW THE U.S. HAS VERY,
VERY LOW OIL PRICES.
DOES THAT MEAN THE BASIC
ECONOMICS, THEY INCREASE SUPPLY,
DECREASE DEMAND, DOES THAT MEAN
THAT THE PRICES FALL FURTHER OR
IS IT A REAL DROP IN THE BUCKET
WHEN YOU THINK OF GLOBAL OIL?
>> NO, IRAN IS A MAJOR OIL
PRODUCER.
THEY USED TO BE THE SECOND
LARGEST PRODUCER IN OPEC SO THE
EFFECTS OF THE IRANIAN
PRODUCTION ON THE WORLD OIL
MARKETS COULD BE LARGE.
AND FOR IRAN, WHILE IT'S A GREAT
OPPORTUNITY TO BE ABLE TO EARN
MORE MONEY AND PRODUCE MORE, IT
REALLY COULDN'T COME AT A WORSE
TIME.
THE WORLDWIDE PRICE OF A BARREL
OF OIL FELL BELOW $30 AT THE
CLOSE ON FRIDAY.
AND YOU KNOW, A FEW YEARS AGO WE
WERE LOOKING AT $100 BARRELS OF
OIL TO PUT THAT IN PERSPECTIVE.
SO IF IRAN IS TO INCREASE
PRODUCTION AND THEREFORE
INCREASE SUPPLY WORLDWIDE, BASIC
ECONOMICS TELLS YOU THAT THAT
WILL SERVE LIKELY TO DEPRESS
PRICES FURTHER.
>> Sreenivasan: ANGELA
GREILING KEANE OF BLOOMBERG,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: WASHINGTON POST
PUBLISHER FRED RYAN SAY THE
NEWSPAPER IS ELATED THAT ITS
FORMER TEHRAN BUREAU CHIEF,
JASON REZAIAN, LEFT IRAN TODAY
AFTER 545 DAYS IN CAPTIVITY,
ADDING, HE LOOKS FORWARD TO
WELCOMING REZAIAN BACK TO THE
NEWSROOM.
FOR MORE ON THAT PART OF THE
STORY, I AM JOINED OVER THE
PHONE BY "POST" EXECUTIVE EDITOR
MARTY BARON AND FOREIGN EDITOR
DOUGLAS JEHL.
THIS HAS BEEN A INCREDIBLY SLOW
AND PAINFUL PROCESS.
THERE WAS A POINT LAST YEAR IN
ABOUT OCTOBER WHEN JASON WAS
CONVICTED BY AN IRANIAN COURT.
I MEAN DOES THAT TAKE THE WIND
OUT OF YOUR SAILS AT THAT POINT.
>> IT WAS A BLOW, ONE OF MANY
BLOWS.
I THINK IT WAS CLEAR FROM THE
VERY OUTSET THAT THE PROCESS OF
JASON'S TRIAL BEFORE AN IRANIAN
COURT WAS REALLY A CHAR AID AND
A CRUEL SIDE SHOW THAT
ULTIMATELY HIS FATE WAS GOING TO
BE RESOLVE-- AND THAT IS WHAT
HAPPENED THIS WEEKEND.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT SORT OF
ACCESS DID YOU HAVE TO THE
PROCESS IS?
WERE YOU GETTING UPDATED FROM
THE STATE DEPARTMENT?
OR WERE YOU IN TOUCH WITH
SOMEBODY IN IRAN DIRECTLY?
>> NO.
WE DID NOT GET UPDATES FROM THE
STATE DEPARTMENT ABOUT HOW THE
NEGOTIATIONS WERE GOING.
WE WEREN'T PART OF THE PROCESS.
YOU KNOW, OBVIOUSLY OUR
REPORTERS WERE REPORTING ON IT.
AS MUCH AS THEY COULD.
BUT WE WERE NOT INVOLVED IN
THOSE NEGOTIATIONS OR ACTUALLY
WE WEREN'T INVOLVED AT ALL.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS ALSO
REMINDED THE AMERICAN AUDIENCE
THAT I MEAN JASON HAD A LOT OF
PEOPLE PULLING FOR HIM.
HE HAD AN OPPORTUNITY THAT IS
POWERFUL IN WASHINGTON.
YOU HAD EDITORS AND REPORTERS
FROM AROUND THE WORLD MAKING
SURE THAT HIS PLIGHT WAS HEARD
OF.
UNLIKE THE OTHER IRANIAN
AMERICANS OR OTHER AMERICANS
THAT QUITE MIGHT BE IN IRAN.
>> YOU DID HAVE POWERFUL
ADVOCATES AROUND THE WORLD.
I DO BELIEVE THAT THE ATTENTION
TO JASON'S CASE ALSO HELPED
ABADINI AND AMIR HEZMATI IN
CALLING ATTENTION TO THE FACT
THAT IT WAS SIMPLY UNACCEPTABLE
FOR IRAN TO BE HOLDING AMERICAN
PRISONERS IN THIS WAY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
DOUG JEHL AND MARTY BARON,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AN AMERICAN IS
AMONG THE 28 PEOPLE KILLED IN
THIS WEEKEND'S TERRORIST ATTACK
IN THE WEST AFRICAN NATION OF
BURKINA FASO.
MISSIONARY MICHAEL RIDDERING,
FROM FLORIDA, RAN AN ORPHANAGE
IN THE COUNTRY WITH HIS WIFE.
HE DIED WHEN FOUR AL QAEDA-
LINKED MILITANTS SHOT THEIR WAY
THROUGH A HOTEL AND NEARBY CAFE
IN BURKINA FASO'S CAPITAL FRIDAY
NIGHT.
SIX CANADIANS WERE ALSO AMONG
THE FATALITIES, AS WERE THE CAFE
OWNER'S WIFE AND NINE-YEAR-OLD
SON.
ANOTHER 50 PEOPLE WERE WOUNDED.
WHEN THEY STORMED THE HOTEL
YESTERDAY, GOVERNMENT AND FRENCH
TROOPS KILLED ALL FOUR
ATTACKERS, TWO OF WHOM WERE
WOMEN.
THEY ALSO FREED MORE THAN 150
HOSTAGES.
SOME GUESTS RETURNED TO THE
HOTEL TODAY TO GET THEIR
LUGGAGE.
THE GROUP AL QAEDA IN THE
ISLAMIC MAGHREB HAS CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE ATTACK.
BURKINA FASO AND NEIGHBORING
MALI, WHICH SUFFERED A HOTEL
TERRORIST ATTACK BY THE SAME
GROUP IN NOVEMBER, TODAY SAID
THEY WOULD PARTNER TO COUNTER
THE THREAT.
SYRIA'S GOVERNMENT SAYS
MILITANTS FROM THE ISLAMIC STATE
GROUP, OR ISIS, HAVE CARRIED OUT
A MASSACRE IN A CITY ISIS
CONTROLS IN EASTERN SYRIA.
THE ALLEGED ATTACK ON CIVILIANS
HAPPENED IN DEIR AL-ZOUR, A
PROVINCE ADJACENT TO THE ISIS
STRONGHOLD OF RAQQA.
SYRIAN STATE-RUN NEWS AGENCY
SAYS ISIS EXECUTED 300 ELDERLY
PEOPLE, WOMEN, AND CHILDREN IN
DEIR AL-ZOUR YESTERDAY.
THE BRITAIN-BASED SYRIAN
OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
SAID ISIS SHOT OR BEHEADED AT
LEAST 135 PEOPLE, AND MORE THAN
HALF WERE GOVERNMENT SOLDIERS.
THE HUMAN RIGHTS GROUP SAID ISIS
ALSO KIDNAPPED 400 PEOPLE IN THE
CITY.
THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR HAS CLAIMED
MORE THAN 250,000 LIVES AND
CAUSED MORE THAN FOUR MILLION
SYRIANS TO BECOME REFUGEES.
A PAIR OF RARE, WINTER TORNADOES
CUT THROUGH CENTRAL FLORIDA
BEFORE DAWN TODAY.
ONE TWISTER TOUCHED DOWN IN THE
SARASOTA AREA, 50 MILES
SOUTHEAST OF TAMPA, AND TWO
PEOPLE DIED WHEN THEIR MOBILE
HOME WAS DESTROYED.
THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE
SAYS THE DEADLY TORNADO HAD
WINDS OF UP TO 135 MILES AN
HOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: OVER THE PAST
YEAR, WE'VE HEARD AND SEEN THE
IMAGES OF SYRIAN REFUGEES MAKE
THE TREACHEROUS CROSSING TO
EUROPE, BUT MOST SYRIAN REFUGEES
LIVE IN NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES
LIKE JORDAN, LEBANON, AND
TURKEY.
IN TURKEY, ABOUT 250,000 SYRIANS
LIVE IN REFUGEE CAMPS, BUT MANY
MORE LIVE OUTSIDE THE CAMPS IN
ORDER TO FIND WORK TO SUPPORT
THEIR FAMILIES.
THIS WEEK, THE TURKISH
GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCED IT WOULD
HELP SOME OF THEM BY ISSUING
MORE WORK PERMITS FOR REFUGEES.
TURKEY IS ALSO POISED TO RECEIVE
AID FROM EUROPE TO PAY FOR
REFUGEE SUPPORT AND TO SLOW
THEIR MIGRATION ONWARD.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT MIKE CERRE
REPORTS ON SYRIAN REFUGEES IN
TURKEY, TORN BETWEEN RETURNING
TO A DANGEROUS HOMELAND AND
STRUGGLING TO START A NEW LIFE.
>> Reporter: AS FAST AS TURKEY'S
GOVERNMENT COULD BUILD THE
DOZENS OF REFUGEE CAMPS ALONG
ITS BORDER WITH SYRIA, THEY WERE
FILLED TO CAPACITY.
TURKEY IS ABOUT TO RECEIVE
$3.2 BILLION FROM THE EUROPEAN
UNION TO HELP COVER ITS REFUGEE
COSTS, AND SECURE ITS BORDERS
WITH EUROPE.
TURKEY HAS ALREADY TIGHTENED ITS
SOUTHERN BORDER TO STEM LAST
YEAR'S OVERFLOW OF REFUGEES FROM
SYRIA.
THE MAJORITY OF THEM ARE STAYING
HERE CLOSE TO THE TURKISH-SYRIAN
BORDER.
NEARLY 2.5 MILLION OF THEM ARE
HERE IN TURKEY, THE MOST OF ANY
COUNTRY.
BUT JUST UNDER 11% OF THEM ARE
STAYING IN TRADITIONAL REFUGEE
CAMPS-- PRESENTING A WHOLE NEW
SET OF CHALLENGES FOR
INTERNATIONAL RELIEF AGENCIES.
JEHAN IS ONE OF SEVERAL SYRIAN
REFUGEES WORKING WITH THE
INTERNATIONAL RELIEF
ORGANIZATION "CARE", HELPING
OTHER REFUGEES.
SHE SERVED AS MY TRANSLATOR AS
WE TRAVELED WITH CARE'S RELIEF
TEAMS TO SEE HOW THE MAJORITY OF
REFUGEES NOW LIVE OUTSIDE THE
CAMPS, BECAUSE THEY COULDN'T GET
IN DUE TO OVERCROWDING, OR
BECAUSE WHEN THEY LIVE IN THE
CAMPS, THEY ARE NOT PERMITTED TO
GO OUT AND LOOK FOR WORK.
WE AGREED NOT TO IDENTIFY
REFUGEES BY THEIR FULL NAMES OR
DISCLOSE THEIR LOCATIONS DUE TO
THEIR CONTINUING SECURITY FEARS
SO CLOSE TO THE SYRIAN BORDER.
SADDAM AND HIS EXTENDED FAMILY
LOST THEIR HOMES IN SYRIA TO
FIGHTERS FROM THE SO-CALLED
ISLAMIC STATE GROUP, OR ISIS.
THEY HAVE BEEN IN TURKEY THREE
MONTHS AND NOW LIVE IN THIS
ABANDONED SHOP WITH NO PLUMBING
OR ELECTRICITY THAT COSTS $50 A
MONTH TO RENT.
BECAUSE THE ONLY CONSTRUCTION
AND AGRICULTURE WORK THEY CAN
FIND IS SEASONAL, THEIR ONLY
SOURCE OF INCOME THIS WINTER IS
THEIR 12-YEAR-OLD SON'S JOB IN A
BAKERY THAT PAYS $2 FOR A 12
HOUR DAY.
SADDAM TOLD ME THAT IF THE
SITUATION HERE DOES NOT IMPROVE,
HE WILL CONSIDER LEAVING FOR
EUROPE.
MOST REFUGEES LIVING IN THESE
MAKESHIFT SHELTERS THAT HAVE
SPRUNG UP IN SMALL BORDER TOWNS
HAVE USED UP MOST OF THEIR MONEY
AND OTHER RESOURCES JUST TO GET
INTO TURKEY.
THEY DON'T HAVE THE ADDITIONAL
ONE TO $6,000 PER PERSON
SMUGGLERS WOULD CHARGE THEM TO
GO ONTO EUROPE, AT GREAT RISK IN
A SMALL BOAT OR CROWDED TRUCK.
AND GOING TO THE UNITED STATES
ISN'T EVEN A CONSIDERATION GIVEN
THE COST, DISTANCE FROM SYRIA,
AND THE U.S. IMMIGRATION
RESTRICTIONS.
SALAH, A FORMER PROFESSIONAL
BASKETBALL PLAYER WHO FLED SYRIA
AFTER HE COMPLETED HIS GRADUATE
DEGREE IN BUSINESS STUDIES, HAS
THE MEANS AND PROFESSIONAL
QUALIFICATIONS TO EMIGRATE TO
EUROPE, BUT HE DOUBTS HE WOULD
FIT IN.
>> I CAN AFFORD TO GO TO EUROPE.
I DIDN'T GO THERE.
SO EVEN FOR THE PEOPLE GOING
THERE, THEY MAY BE GOING THERE
FOR THREE OR FOUR YEARS, AND
THEN THEY ARE TURNING BACK.
NONE OF US CAN LIKE, IT'S A
TOTALLY DIFFERENT CULTURE.
>> Reporter: SALAH IS LIKE SOME
SYRIANS WITH ENOUGH RESOURCES
AND SKILLS TO SETTLE IN THE
LARGER TURKISH CITIES NEAR THE
BORDER, LIKE GAZIANTEP.
HE WANTS TO STAY IN THE REGION
SO HE CAN GO BACK TO HIS
HOMETOWN, ALEPPO, AS SOON AS
IT'S SAFE ENOUGH.
>> IF YOU GO TO GAZIANTEP, WHERE
I AM BASED THERE, YOU CAN SEE
ALL OF THE SYRIANS FROM ALEPPO
CITY LIVING IN GAZIANTEP.
LIKE BECAUSE GAZIANTEP, IT'S
REALLY CLOSE TO ALEPPO, LIKE THE
SAME KIND OF FOOD, THE SAME,
LIKE, WEATHER AND EVERYTHING
ELSE.
>> LOOK, THEY HAVE SYRIAN COFFEE
HERE AND ALL THE TRADEMARKS ARE
SYRIAN.
>> Reporter: RANA, WHO WAS AN
ENGLISH LITERATURE PROFESSOR IN
SYRIA, IS NOW A SOCIAL WORKER
HELPING HER FELLOW REFUGEES GET
FOOD AND HOUSING.
SHE BELIEVES MANY REFUGEES'
CULTURAL TIES TO THE REGION ARE
HOLDING THEM BACK FROM GOING TO
EUROPE AS MUCH AS THE FINANCIAL
AND LEGAL OBSTACLES.
>> IT DEPENDS ON THE MENTALITY
OF SYRIAN PEOPLE.
FOR EXAMPLE, IF THEY FIND JOBS,
AND THEY COULD BE ABLE AFFORD
LIVING IN TURKEY, I THINK THEY
WOULD RATHER STAY IN TURKEY,
THEY DON'T NEED TO EVEN EXERT
THE EFFORT TO LEARN THE
LANGUAGE, AND THEY SHARE A LOT
WITH TURKISH PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: THAT'S ESPECIALLY
THE CASE FOR THE SYRIAN KURDS
LIKE TAKSIM AND HIS FAMILY, WHO
SHARE A COMMON LANGUAGE AND
CULTURE WITH THE TURKISH KURDS
WHO POPULATE TURKEY'S
SOUTHEASTERN BORDER.
TAKSEM SOLD HIS WIFE'S RINGS TO
PAY RENT FOR THEIR APARTMENT IN
THIS UNFINISHED BUILDING.
>> INSHALLA AKSI KOBANI.
>> Reporter: HE SAYS THEY'RE
CONSIDERING MOVING BACK TO THEIR
HOMETOWN OF KOBANI NOW THAT
KURDISH MILITIAS HAVE RETAKEN IT
FROM ISIS.
THE TURKISH GOVERNMENT SAY IT
HAS SPENT MORE THAN $8 BILLION
ON THE SYRIAN REFUGEE CRISIS.
BY LAW, ALL REGISTERED REFUGEES
QUALIFY FOR TURKISH HEALTH CARE,
EDUCATION AND WITH A PERMIT THE
RIGHT TO WORK.
BUT THESE BENEFITS AND JOBS ARE
HARD TO FIND OUTSIDE THE MAJOR
CITIES WHERE MOST SYRIAN
REFUGEES CAN'T AFFORD TO LIVE OR
IN THE SMALLER BORDER TOWNS
WHICH HAVE FEWER SOCIAL
SERVICES.
SINCE SPEAKING TURKISH IS A
PREREQUISITE, FEW ARABIC AND
KURDISH SPEAKING SYRIAN CHILDREN
ATTEND SCHOOL HERE OTHER THAN
PART-TIME SCHOOLS LIKE THIS ONE
SET UP BY SYRIAN TEACHERS.
A TYPICAL JOB MOST REFUGEES FIND
IS LOW-PAYING FARM WORK.
THE LACK OF STEADY WORK MATCHING
THEIR SKILLS AND EDUCATION IS
THE GREATEST OBSTACLE TO
SETTLING HERE.
EMAD-- A SHOPKEEPER BACK IN
SYRIA-- OCCASIONALLY IS HIRED
FOR CONSTRUCTION WORK BUT SAYS
HE GETS PAID HALF WHAT A TURKISH
WORKER EARNS.
HE THINKS MORE ABOUT GOING HOME
TO SYRIA THAN GOING TO EUROPE.
>> HE IS SAYING MAYBE IF HE GOES
TO EUROPE AND, LIKE, BE FAR
AWAY, HE WOULD FORGET ABOUT
SYRIA.
>> Reporter: AS THE NEW HEAD OF
CARE USA, MICHELLE NUNN WENT TO
THE REGION LAST SUMMER TO ASSESS
THE REFUGEES' NEEDS AND HOW AID
GROUPS COULD BEST HELP THE HOST
COUNTRIES.
>> WHEN I ASKED PEOPLE HOW THEY
WERE GOING TO GET THROUGH THE
WINTER, THEY SAID THEY DIDN'T
KNOW.
AND WHAT WE WANT THEM TO BE ABLE
TO SURVIVE AND HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO START TO REBUILD
AND TO RECREATE LIVES OF MEANING
AND PURPOSE SO THEY CAN THINK
ABOUT GOING BACK TO SYRIA AT
SOME POINT AND STAYING WHERE
THEY ARE AND NOT RISKING THEIR
LIVES AND THE LIVES OF THEIR
CHILDREN TO CROSS OCEANS AND TO
EMIGRATE.
>> Reporter: CARE IS THE
ORGANIZATION THAT CREATED THE
ORIGINAL CARE PACKAGE FIRST SENT
BY AMERICANS SEVENTY WINTERS AGO
TO EUROPEAN REFUGEES AFTER WORLD
WAR TWO.
CARE HAS UPDATED THE CONCEPT TO
HELP SYRIAN REFUGEES.
>> THIS COULD BE DESCRIBED AS
THE NEW CARE PACKAGE.
IT'S AN ELECTRONIC VOUCHER.
>> Reporter: THE FOOD VOUCHERS
THAT CARE AND OTHER
ORGANIZATIONS MANAGE WORK LIKE
DEBIT CARDS.
BUT THEY CAN BE USED ONLY TO BUY
FOOD AND HOUSEHOLD ESSENTIALS.
NEW CREDIT IS ADDED MONTHLY WITH
FUNDING FROM THE UNITED NATIONS
AND LARGE AID ORGANIZATIONS.
CARE BELIEVES THE ELECTRONIC
VOUCHERS ARE NOW A FASTER AND
MORE FLEXIBLE WAY TO DELIVER
FOOD AND CLOTHING, THAN
SHIPPING, STORING, AND
DELIVERING PACKAGES.
>> THESE FOOD VOUCHERS STARTED
OUT WITH A VALUE OF $30 PER
MONTH PER PERSON, UNTIL A
SHORTFALL IN INTERNATIONAL
FUNDING
TODAY IN TURKEY, THIS VOUCHER IS
WORTH ABOUT $18 A MONTH.
THAT MEANS 60 CENTS A DAY FOR
FOOD.
>> Reporter: IN ADDITION TO FOOD
VOUCHERS, CARE IS HELPING
REFUGEES WITH OTHER VOUCHER
CARDS TO BUY HEATERS, COATS, AND
BLANKETS TO GET THEM THROUGH
THIS WINTER.
>> BY GIVING A VOUCHER RATHER
THAN A SET KIT OF IN KIND
DONATIONS, IT ENABLES THE FAMILY
TO CHOOSE WHAT'S RIGHT FOR THEM
AND MEET THEIR OWN NEEDS BETTER.
>> Reporter: TOO SCARED TO GO
FORWARD TO EUROPE OR BACK TO
WAR-TORN SYRIA, MOST OF THE
REFUGEES WE MET ARE RESIGNED TO
THE REALITY OF LIVING IN TURKEY
FOR THE FORESEEABLE FUTURE,
ESPECIALLY IF THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY FULFILLS ITS PLEDGES
OF HUMANITARIAN AID.
LIVING JUST A FEW MILES UP THE
EUPHRATES RIVER FROM SYRIA,
THESE BORDER TOWNS ARE AS CLOSE
TO HOME AS THEY CAN BE.
>> Sreenivasan: SEE HOW THE
STORY OF ONE SYRIAN REFUGEE IN
TURKEY CAUGHT THE ATTENTION OF
THE CREATOR OF "HUMANS OF NEW
YORK."
VISIT pbs.org/newshour
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: SCIENTISTS
BELIEVE A SPECIES OF DINOSAUR
ON PUBLIC VIEW FOR THE FIRST
TIME MAY BE THE BIGGEST
CREATURE TO HAVE EVER WALKED THE
EARTH.
STARTING THIS WEEKEND,
VISITORS TO NEW YORK'S AMERICAN
MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY CAN
GET CLOSE UP.
THE NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: THIS 122-FOOT-LONG
SKELETON IS CALLED A TITANOSAUR.
WHEN IT ROAMED THE EARTH 100
MILLION YEARS AGO, IT WEIGHED AS
MUCH AS 10 ELEPHANTS, OR 70
TONS.
AND ITS NECK COULD HAVE PEEKED
INSIDE A FIFTH FLOOR WINDOW.
THIS RECENTLY DISCOVERED SPECIES
IS SO BIG, IT STRETCHES THROUGH
TWO EXHIBIT ROOMS AT THE MUSEUM
OF NATURAL HISTORY.
PALEONTOLOGIST MARK NORELL IS
THE CURATOR.
>> IT GIVES US OUR FIRST GOOD,
REAL PICTURE ABOUT HOW WE FOUND
THEM, ABOUT HOW BIG THEY WERE,
ABOUT HOW TALL THEY WERE.
>> Reporter: A RANCHER IN
ARGENTINA'S PATAGONIA DESERT
DISCOVERED THE FIRST TITANOSAUR
FOSSILS IN 2012.
TWO YEARS LATER, PALEONTOLOGISTS
EXCAVATED 223 MORE BONES
BELONGING TO SIX DINOSAURS
THERE.
AMONG THE EXCAVATED BONES WAS
THIS THIGH BONE, MEASURING EIGHT
FEET LONG.
>> FOR A LONG TIME, WE'VE KNOWN
THAT ANIMALS MAY HAVE APPROACHED
THIS SIZE, BUT THEY WERE LARGELY
JUST QUITE FRAGMENTARY REMAINS,
AND WE COULDN'T GET A REALLY
GOOD LOOK AT JUST HOW IMMENSE
THESE CREATURES WERE.
>> Reporter: THE REAL FOSSILS
ARE TOO HEAVY TO MOUNT.
SO CANADIAN RESEARCHERS USED 3-D
SCANS TO CAST LIGHTWEIGHT
FIBERGLASS REPLICAS OF 84
ORIGINAL BONES TO CREATE THE
GIANT SKELETON NOW ON VIEW.
NORELL SAYS 3-D PRINTERS AND
OTHER ADVANCES IN TECHNOLOGY
HELP IMPROVE THE STUDY OF THESE
EXTINCT ANIMALS.
>> IT'S A GOOD TIME TO BE A
PALEONTOLOGIST.
>> Reporter: THE SPECIES FOUND
IN ARGENTINA WILL GET ITS FORMAL
SCIENTIFIC NAME IN THE NEXT FEW
MONTHS.
FOR MORE, WATCH "RAISING THE
DINOSAUR GIANT" ON THE PBS
SERIES "NATURE", PREMIERING
FEBRUARY 17.
>> Sreenivasan: $5 MILLION IN
FEDERAL AID IS ON THE WAY TO
HELP FLINT, MICHIGAN, DEAL WITH
TOXIC TAP WATER.
MICHIGAN'S GOVERNOR REQUESTED
EMERGENCY AID TO PURCHASE
BOTTLED WATER AND TESTING KITS.
THE WATER BECAME CONTAMINATED
WHEN THE CITY SWITCHED ITS MAIN
SOURCE FROM LAKE HURON TO FLINT
RIVER CAUSING LEAD TO LEACH
FROM OLD WATER PIPES.
AND FINALLY THE NEWEST PANDA
CUB MADE ITS PUBLIC DEBUT THIS
WEEKEND AT THE NATIONAL ZOO IN
WASHINGTON.
BEI BEI WAS BORN FOUR MONTHS
AGO, THE THIRD SURVIVING CUB OF
HIS PARENTS WHO ALSO LIVE AT THE
ZOO.
BEI BEI WILL GO TO CHINA WHEN
HE TURNS FOUR.
TOMORROW ON THE NEWSHOUR MORE
ANALYSIS OF THE IRAN DEAL AND A
REVIEW OF TONIGHT'S DEMOCRATIC
PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE IN IOWA.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, HAVE A
GOOD NIGHT.